# CPR & Anaphylaxis

## Student Training Guidelines

### Evaluation – Support – Feedback

*   Evaluate your client’s experience to build confidence
*   Collect feedback from client to build knowledge
*   Learning to support yourself through head office

### Certification Requirements

*   Question and answer time must be completed
*   Answers must meet the pass criteria
*   Theory work completed and marked prior to physical training

### Training Brief

*   Rules and regulations
*   Discrimination and equality
*   Blown Aesthetics Code of conduct
*   Training breakdown

### Practical assessments and evaluation

*   Evaluation and question and answering
*   Customer satisfaction

### What will we cover in theory training?

*   Paper training manuals
*   Paper documentation
*   Skills and assessment ability
*   Product evaluations and case studies

### What will students gain from theory learning?

*   Product knowledge
*   Science and factual evidence
*   Industry knowledge
*   Confidence
*   Listening skills
*   Professionalism
*   How to approach a client
*   How to deal with uneasy clients and the correct protocol
*   Refund regulations on products
*   Customer care
*   Customer service
*   Equality and discrimination
*   Diversity
*   Rules and regulations
*   Codes of practise
*   Laws and legislations

### Conducting practical training

*   Interaction
*   Hands on experience
*   Evaluations
*   Case studies
*   Personal experiences
*   Role play
*   Health and safety
*   Observational thinking
*   Student input
*   Allowing outspoken opinions.
*   Showing the student how to complete customer disclaimers
*   Demonstrations

### What student benefits will they gain from practical learning?

*   Data protection knowledge
*   Record keeping
*   Filling out disclaimers and filing procedures
*   Practical application
*   Health and safety
*   Professionalism
*   Customer objections
*   Observational hazards
*   Cross contamination/infection

**Please note:** Students must be well presented and have their hair tied back. Students that arrive any later than ten minutes into a training session will not be able to enter the session. This is a distraction for others also attending training.

---

Blown Aesthetics would like to take time to thank you for training with us and we hope that you enjoy your experience.

---

## Anaphylaxis

Anaphylaxis shock is a serious life-threatening allergic reaction which usually occurs within few seconds or minutes of exposure to allergic substances. This involves hives, swelling and sudden drop in the blood pressure and sometimes shock.

The symptoms are caused by the sudden release of chemical substances, including histamine, from cells in the blood and tissues where they are stored. The release is triggered by the interaction between an allergic antibody called **Immunoglobulin E (IgE)** and the substance (allergen) causing the anaphylactic reaction.

### Symptoms of anaphylaxis

Anaphylaxis usually develops suddenly and gets worse very quickly.

The symptoms include:

*   feeling lightheaded or faint
*   breathing difficulties – such as fast, shallow breathing
*   wheezing
*   a fast heartbeat
*   clammy skin
*   confusion and anxiety
*   collapsing or losing consciousness

There may also be other allergy symptoms, including an itchy, raised rash (hives); feeling or being sick; swelling (angioedema) or stomach pain.

Anaphylaxis is a medical emergency. It can be very serious if not treated quickly.

If someone has symptoms of anaphylaxis, you should:

1.  Use an adrenaline auto-injector if the person has one – but make sure you know how to use it correctly first.
2.  Call 999 for an ambulance immediately (even if they start to feel better) – mention that you think the person has anaphylaxis.
3.  Remove any trigger if possible – for example, carefully remove any stinger stuck in the skin.
4.  Lie the person down flat – unless they're unconscious, pregnant or having breathing difficulties.
5.  Give another injection after 5 to 15 minutes if the symptoms do not improve and a second auto-injector is available.

If you're having an anaphylactic reaction, you can follow these steps yourself if you feel able to.

### Triggers of anaphylaxis

Anaphylaxis is the result of the immune system, the body's natural defence system, overreacting to a trigger.

This is often something you're allergic to, but not always.

Common anaphylaxis triggers include:

*   foods – including nuts, milk, fish, shellfish, eggs and some fruits
*   medicines – including some antibiotics and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) like aspirin
*   insect stings – particularly wasp and bee stings
*   general anaesthetic
*   contrast agents – dyes used in some medical tests to help certain areas of your body show up better on scans
*   latex – a type of rubber found in some rubber gloves and condoms

In some cases, there's no obvious trigger. This is known as **idiopathic anaphylaxis**.

### Preventing anaphylaxis

If you have a serious allergy or have experienced anaphylaxis before, it's important to try to prevent future episodes.

The following can help reduce your risk:

*   identify any triggers – you may be referred to an allergy clinic for allergy tests to check for anything that could trigger anaphylaxis
*   avoid triggers whenever possible – for example, you should be careful when food shopping or eating out if you have a food allergy
*   carry your adrenaline auto-injector at all times (if you have 2, carry them both) – give yourself an injection whenever you think you may be experiencing anaphylaxis, even if you're not completely sure

### Adrenaline auto-injectors

People with potentially serious allergies are often prescribed adrenaline auto-injectors to carry at all times.

These can help stop an anaphylactic reaction becoming life threatening.

They should be used as soon as a serious reaction is suspected, either by the person experiencing anaphylaxis or someone helping them.

Make sure you're aware how to use your type of auto-injector correctly. And, carry 2 of them with you at all times.

There are 3 main types of adrenaline auto-injector, which are used in slightly different ways.

These are:

*   EpiPen
*   Jext
*   Emerade

Instructions are also included on the side of each injector if you forget how to use it or someone else needs to give you the injection.

### Positioning and resuscitation

Someone experiencing anaphylaxis should be placed in a comfortable position.

*   most people should lie flat
*   pregnant women should lie on their left side to avoid putting too much pressure on the large vein that leads to the heart
*   people having trouble breathing should sit up to help make breathing easier
*   people who are unconscious should be placed in the recovery position to ensure the airway remains open and clear – place them on their side, making sure they're supported by one leg and one arm, and open their airway by lifting their chin
*   avoid a sudden change to an upright posture such as standing or sitting up – this can cause a dangerous fall in blood pressure

If the person's breathing or heart stops, **cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)** should be performed immediately.

---

## Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation

### What is it?

CPR is a life saving medical procedure which is given to someone who is in cardiac arrest It is useful in many emergencies, such as a heart attack or near drowning, in which someone's breathing or heartbeat has stopped.

To carry out CPR a person presses up and down on the casualty’s chest (chest compressions) and gives them a series of rescue breaths to help save their life when they are in cardiac arrest

Be assured that whilst giving rescue breaths helps survival, Hands-only CPR can still increase a person’s chance of survival.

**Never do nothing.**

It causes the person to fall unconscious and stop breathing. Without CPR the person will die within minutes.

CPR should only be used if someone is:

*   unconscious and not breathing
*   unconscious and not breathing normally.

If someone is unconscious but they are breathing normally call 999 and then put them in the recovery position.

### How long should I continue CPR?

Always call 999 before starting CPR. Then keep doing CPR until professional help arrives and takes over, or the person starts to show signs of regaining consciousness. If you become exhausted, take turns with other people nearby.

Signs of regaining consciousness include:

*   coughing
*   opening their eyes
*   speaking or moving purposefully
*   starting to breathe normally.

Stop CPR if the person regains consciousness. If the person starts to breathe normally but still unconscious, put them into the recovery position and pay attention to their breathing until help arrives.

### How does CPR help?

By performing chest compressions and rescue breaths, you are taking over the role of their heart and lungs, pumping blood and oxygen around their body. Performing chest compressions only (hands only) will still be of benefit until the emergency services arrive.

Every second counts – any delay can quickly reduce a person’s chance of survival.